\abstract{Ceramic pebble beds as tritium breeding volumes in fusion reactors must endure high power densities while maintaining both continued transport of high quality heat into coolants for power production as well as ceramic temperatures within relatively-narrow prescribed operating windows. The ceramic pebble beds, as non-cohesive granular material, exist with meta-stable packing structures that will evolve from the external and internal forces acting upon them during long-term operation as tritium breeders. As a consequence, predictive models of solid breeder heat transfer characteristics must contend with transient packing structures and the changing modes of heat transfer they present. To provide such predictive modeling, microscale numerical models were developed allowing investigation of thermal transport in pebble beds operating in environmental conditions relevant to planned fusion reactors. 

From the point-of-view of interacting constituents in an ensemble, the thermal discrete element method (DEM) is used to track motions of, and heat transfer between, individual pebbles. The slow-moving, interstitial helium purge gas is considered by coupling to DEM models with two modeling approaches, differentiated by their treatment of conservation equations. In the first approach, the fluid is considered with a mesoscopic, volume-averaged computational fluid dynamic (CFD) method. Volume-averaged models of helium are computationally efficient and provide an overall view of helium influence on heat transfer in solid breeder pebble beds. To gain insight into the complete fluid flow patterns and heat transfer in packed beds with changing packing states, a second microscopic approach for fluid modeling with the lattice-Boltzmann method (LBM) is also employed. The lattice-Boltzmann method solves for density distribution functions on regularized lattice nodes and is well-suited to modeling of complex porous structures due to its inherent parallelizability and simple application of solid-fluid interface boundary conditions on structured grids. 

Several phenomena are identified as capable of causing alterations to packing structures in solid breeders and thereby heat transfer properties, including: (i) inter-particle sintering, or necking; (ii) creep relaxation; (iii) crushing/cracking of individual pebbles in ensembles. These phenomena, and their specific changes to temperature distributions in pebble beds, will each require individualized attention and modeling efforts. In this study, focus is given to heat transfer phenomena relating to, and developing predictive capabilities for, thermal characterization in pebble beds with packing structures solely altered by pebble crushing and fragmentation.

The modeling approach of this thesis was to leverage widely-supported open-source codes as foundations. One advantage is that the codes adopted in this thesis have had their mathematical formulations of physics, time-integration techniques, and boundary condition implementations validated and verified. Moreover, the open-source codes have all their library source codes available for modification and expansion, permitting new contact laws and material property formulations to be implemented in a straight-forward manner. 

DEM time step integration, domain decomposition and parallelizing, and neighbor lists are handled by LAMMPS (Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator), maintained by Sandia National Labs. Granular heat transfer and Hertzian contact mechanics are accomplished with LIGGGHTS (LAMMPS Improved for General Granular and Granular Heat Transfer Simulations). Volume-averaged CFD modeling is realized withing the open-source framework of OpenFOAM\textsuperscript{\textregistered} (Open source Field Operation and Manipulation), a generalized toolbox for solving the partial differential equations common to continuum mechanics. The coupling routines dictating inter-phase exchange coefficients and coupling time steps between DEM and CFD are maintained in a library provided by DCS Computing GmbH. Finally, collision and streaming operations, bounce-back boundary conditions, and block decomposition for parallelizing in the LBM method are handled with Palabos, code maintained by FlowKit Ltd. Coupling between the Lagrangian pebbles of DEM and structured lattices of LBM is performed with code developed for this thesis.

The DEM, CFD-DEM, and LBM codes have broad support in academic and industrial situations, but have nevertheless not been applied to study packed beds under the unique conditions of a fusion reactor. Therefore, all models are first validated against experimental measurements of known heat transfer conditions of packed beds with stagnant interstitial gases and, in the process of validation, new phenomonological models of material properties and heat transfer were necessary. The main contributions to modeling codes developed in the process of the current research are as follows.
\begin{itemize}
\item{The elastic response of individual pebbles in uniaxial compression experiments displayed a wide spread in contradiction to Hertz theory for elastic solids. The effect was captured with a probablistic distribution of an `apparent' Young's modulus for pebble batches.}
\item{Pebble beds with the universally-applied contact conductance laws, based on Hertzian contact areas, had effective thermal conductivity values calculated with an error of more than 200\%, compared to experimental values of pebble beds in vacuum. Surface roughness of pebbles at contacts will reduce heat conductance, our model incorporates roughness with approximated asperity and hardness values for lithiated ceramics to reduce the error by more than 120\%.}
\item{A volume- and energy-conserving pebble fragmentation algorithm is developed with an overlap-relaxation technique for velocity-Verlet integration of position. The modeling technique is the first of its kind to consider fragmentation travel and loose-fragment volumetric heating effects on heat transfer in packed beds.}
\item{The DEM technique has an inherent lumped-capacitance assumption for heat transfer in pebbles. The lumped capacitance model for materials with volumetric heating was shown to have error on steady-state temperature predictions, sometimes even for small Biot number materials with volumetric heating. The Jeffreson correction to heat transfer coefficient, applied to the inter-phase exchange coefficient in CFD-DEM coupling, was shown to eliminate errors in the lumped capacitance model.}
\end{itemize}

Following validation and benchmark tests, the models are applied toward the study of fusion-relevant conditions in solid breeders. Three main application studies were performed: (i) DEM and CFD-DEM simulations consider effective thermal conductivity responses to solid conductivity reductions due to irradiation damage; (ii) parametric studies with CFD-DEM of heat transfer in ITER-relevant solid breeder volumes as a function of, among other features, pebble crushing and fragmentation; and (iii) LBM-DEM simulations of complete helium flow field, tortuosity, conjugate heat transfer, and transverse dispersive conductivity changes in packed beds with crushed pebble fragments. The microscale nature of models developed for this thesis made possible the uncovering of several critical and consequential phenomena. The following lists several of the main achievements of current modeling efforts:

\begin{itemize}
\item{Temperature profiles were predicted for pebble beds with irradiation damage in solid pebbles, as modeled by reductions in thermal conductivity. In the case of stagnant interstitial fluid, an example case was shown where a 50\% reduction in solid conductivity would permit a solid breeder to operate within a 10\% margin on maximum mid-line temperature.}
\item{Fully-dynamic CFD-DEM simulations revealed the impact of packing structure alterations on heat transfer in ITER-relevant packed beds and, as such, the importance of their modeling. Mass re-distribution following crush events, dependent on the size and extent of fragmentation, was shown to induce subtle changes to local packing fractions yet result in macroscopically important changes to temperature distributions with volumetric heating. In the worst case of small fragments (diameters 20\% of the original pebbles) and wide-spread pebble damage (5\% crushed pebbles in the ensemble), maximum bed temperatures increased by approximately 14\% (under a nuclear heating rate of 8 MW/m3).}
\item{Horizontal-style configurations of coolant interfaces (such as in the proposed European Union design of solid breeder for ITER) were shown to be much more tolerant to pebble fragmentation than previously considered. The configuration’s orientation relative to the gravity vector resulted in slight `broadening’ of temperature profiles, and even slightly lower peak-to-average temperatures than vertical-style configurations, as packing structures evolved due to fragmentation.}
\item{LBM models validated the accuracy of the volume-averaged approach of fluid flow and energy interaction between solid and fluid phases, as adopted in CFD-DEM models. The maximum difference between temperature profiles predicted with CFD-DEM and LBM-DEM models was only 6\%, while CFD-DEM simulations were run in considerably less time than the full models of LBM-DEM (hours compared to days). The contribution of transverse dispersive conductivity, a heat transfer mechanism not accounted for in CFD-DEM, was shown to be not significant for the range of Reynolds/Peclet numbers of interest for purge gas in solid breeders and the failure percentages in the packed bed configurations considered; the dispersive component of conductivity, even in beds with fragments and higher tortuosity, was only 0.5\% of the total effective thermal conductivity.}
\end{itemize}

Insight provided by the models were used to shed light on possible future paths of solid breeder research. Briefly, the causes of packing alterations studied here should be complemented with other factors, such as creep and sintering; a framework was demonstrated for including effects of irradiation damage in models of heat transfer in packed beds, the models can be used in conjunction with models of packing structure alteration toward even more precise predictive capabilities for temperature distributions; and lastly, it was shown that heat-spreading due to dispersive conductivity in poly-disperse packed beds may offer significant benefits to lowering maximum temperature distributions in pebble beds that the negative effects on pressure drop may be acceptable, the competing effects should be studied in detail.

Finally, limitations of the models were also described in this thesis and these limitations are themselves rich grounds for future research. It was shown that radiation heat transfer between pebbles, at the upper end of solid breeder temperature windows, is more than 20\% of the heat transfered due to contact conductance. As such, radiation must be eventually be considered in DEM models for solid breeders. It was also shown that the combination of long mean-free-path of helium at elevated temperatures and the constricted space between pebbles in packed beds may violate the Knudsen criteria for continuum media and no-slip boundary conditions ($\Kn < 10^{-2}$). It may be worth investigating LBM models combining slip and no-slip boundaries, applied in different regions of the pebble bed to account for violation of Knudsen criteria in localized regions.

}